KXI-70495: VSCode Connection usability and new e2e CI Tests (#777)
KxSystems/kx-vscode: CHANGELOG.md

All notable changes to the **kdb VS Code extension** are documented in this
file.

# v1.20.0

### Enhancements

- Every connected connection now has its own output console in the terminal
  panel. Query results, and the Insights scratchpad log, are written to the
  console of the connection that produced them instead of to a single shared

>   output channel. Each console links to the **kdb Results View** for the results

Reviewer: Can you explain what this means?

> Each console links to the **kdb Results View** for the results of the last query.

Author: A link is displayed in output Terminal when kdb Results View is active:
<img width="931" height="138" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/9b150ecc-51b2-4873-b94b-b5500746df18" />

  of the last query.
- Files that are not assigned to a connection now run on the **active target** —
  the KX terminal last started or focused, whether that is a REPL or a
  connection's output console. The status bar item and the code lens read
  `(active)` and **Run on active** for these files, and the connection picker is
  offered for any `q`, `quke`, `py` or `sql` file rather than for workbooks
  alone.
- The status bar connection and timeout selectors now follow **KX Notebooks**.
  Opening a notebook shows the connection it is assigned to, `(active)` when it
  has none, and the query timeout when that connection is an Insights one, in

>   the same way as for a q, `quke`, Python or SQL file.

Reviewer: Elsewhere in the change log, all the types are in back ticks, but here it's just quke?

- Connections can now be chosen for files opened from outside the workspace.
  Previously picking one failed with _Document (…) is not in workspace_.
  Assignments for these files are kept in memory and are lost when VS Code
  restarts.

> - Added a results destination selector to the editor context menu for `q`,

Reviewer: What's this called? I don't see it in the context menu

Author: It should be context toolbar.

  `quke`, `py` and `sql` files, to send query results either to the terminal or
  to the **kdb Results View**.
- Images returned by a process, such as a plot, are now written to their own
  `.plot` file and opened in the chart editor, so a process emitting several
  images produces one chart view apiece.

> - Errors raised by a custom evaluator now come back with a stack trace rather

Reviewer: Can this be explained differently? I don't know what a custom evaluator means here

Author: This is meant to be the complete change log for the extension since last release, this was your change in https://github.com/KxSystems/kx-vscode/pull/751 What should we call it?

Reviewer: Ah, that makes sense. 
```
- Errors raised by a custom evaluator now come back with a stack trace rather
than the error message alone. As the extension does not format errors
differently to results, the call stack is what indicates that a result is an
error.
```
could be rewritten to have some more context
```
When connected to a process that uses vscode.q and has .vscode.customQEvaluator defined, any error messages thrown by the customQEvaluator will now include the call stack.
```

  than the error message alone. As the extension does not format errors
  differently to results, the call stack is what indicates that a result is an
  error.
- Insights connection addresses must now be secure `https://` URLs, and are
  reported as a validation error when they are not. The address placeholder in
  the connection form now uses `example.com`, and the login flow follows
  authentication redirects.
- Connection form fields are now marked as required, and validation messages
  name the field they refer to (for example _Port number is required._ rather
  than _Input value must be a number._).

> - `vscode.q`, the API injected into connected q processes, is now published as

Reviewer: This is a bit confusing. "Injected" makes it sound like we're defining functions in connected q processes. This could be something like
"For users using vscode.q to connect the extension to processes that don't allow calls to anonymous lambdas, the vscode.q file is now published as an asset with each release"

  an asset with each release.

### Fixes

- Fixed an issue where evaluating a single character Python query threw a type

>   error, because the query was incorrectly enlisted.

Reviewer: The implementation here isn't relevant to the end user
```suggestion
  error.
```

All notable changes to the **kdb VS Code extension** are documented in this
file.

# v1.20.0

### Enhancements

- Every connected connection now has its own output console in the terminal
  panel. Query results, and the Insights scratchpad log, are written to the
  console of the connection that produced them instead of to a single shared

>   output channel. Each console links to the **kdb Results View** for the results

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  output channel. When results are sent to the **kdb Results View**,
```

>   of the last query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  the console prints a link to open it.
```

- Files that are not assigned to a connection now run on the **active target** —
  the KX terminal last started or focused, whether that is a REPL or a
  connection's output console. The status bar item and the code lens read
  `(active)` and **Run on active** for these files, and the connection picker is
  offered for any `q`, `quke`, `py` or `sql` file rather than for workbooks
  alone.
- The status bar connection and timeout selectors now follow **KX Notebooks**.
  Opening a notebook shows the connection it is assigned to, `(active)` when it
  has none, and the query timeout when that connection is an Insights one, in
  the same way as for a q, `quke`, `Python` or `SQL` file.
- Connections can now be chosen for files opened from outside the workspace.

>   Previously picking one failed with _Document (…) is not in workspace_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  Previously, selecting one failed with _Document (…) is not in workspace_.
```

  Assignments for these files are kept in memory and are lost when VS Code
  restarts.

> - Added a results destination selector to the editor toolbar for `q`, `quke`,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Added an Output Destination selector to the editor toolbar for `q`, `quke`,
```

>   `py` and `sql` files, to send query results either to the terminal or to the

Reviewer 2: Are `kdb.json` files included here too? Or just `q`, `quke`, `py`, `sql`?

  **kdb Results View**.
- Images returned by a process, such as a plot, are now written to their own

>   `.plot` file and opened in the chart editor, so a process emitting several

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  `.plot` file and opened in the chart editor, so that a process that emits several
```

>   images produces one chart view apiece.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  images produces a separate chart view for each image.
```

- Errors raised by a custom evaluator now come back with a stack trace rather

>   than the error message alone. As the extension does not format errors

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  than the error message alone. Because the extension does not format errors
```

>   differently to results, the call stack is what indicates that a result is an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  differently from results, the call stack is what indicates that a result is an
```

  error.

> - Insights connection addresses must now be secure `https://` URLs, and are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Insights connection addresses must now be secure `https://` URLs. The extension
```

>   reported as a validation error when they are not. The address placeholder in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  reports a validation error for any other address. The address placeholder in
```

  the connection form now uses `example.com`, and the login flow follows
  authentication redirects.
- Connection form fields are now marked as required, and validation messages
  name the field they refer to (for example _Port number is required._ rather
  than _Input value must be a number._).

> - For users using `vscode.q` to connect the extension to processes that don't

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `vscode.q`, the API injected into connected q processes, is 
```

Reviewer: @vcalescu that suggests that vscode.q is automatically injected into the q processes the extension connects to. It's a separate file that the user needs to manually load. I don't want users to worry that we're automatically adding q code to their process when we aren't.

Reviewer: @vcalescu also, github lets you suggest changes to multiple lines in a single comment. If you click and drag the + to add a comment, the ```suggestion block will cover all the lines you selected

>   allow calls to anonymous lambdas, the `vscode.q` file is now published as an

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  now published as an asset with each release. This is particularly relevant for users using `vscode.q` 
```

>   asset with each release."

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  to connect the extension to processes that don't allow calls to anonymous lambdas.
```

### Fixes

- Fixed an issue where evaluating a single character Python query threw a type

>   error.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  error because the query was incorrectly enlisted.
```

Author: Remove the detail on per @bjeffery-kx  request.

- Fixed the syntax highlighting of the `by` clause.
- Fixed an issue where a PNG returned as an array of bytes was not recognised as
  an image.

> - Insights queries whose coordinator or gateway connection drops mid-request,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Fixed an issue where Insights queries and scratchpad populate requests that failed mid-request
```

>   and scratchpad populates that fail mid-request, now report a readable error

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  because the coordinator or gateway connection dropped, did not report a readable error.
```

Author: @vcalescu I could not understand this one.

>   and are recorded in the query history.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  These requests now report the error and are recorded in the query history. These requests now report the error and are recorded in the query history.
```

Author: @vcalescu I could not understand this one.

- Fixed the syntax highlighting of the `by` clause.
- Fixed an issue where a PNG returned as an array of bytes was not recognised as
  an image.
- Fixed an issue where Insights queries and scratchpad populate requests that

>   failed mid-request

Reviewer: It looks like this sentence got cut off half way through

Author: This was already fixed.
